---
layout: post
title:  ""
author: Ria Dani
jhed: rdani1
categories: [ HW3 ]
image: homework/hw3/hw3_rdani1.png
featured: false
---

### 1. Written Answer

In my data visualization, I made a multi-panel visualization and analysis of cluster 6 which I identified as a transcriptionally distinct population using k-means clustering and PCA. The first panel shows the distribution of the clusters using reduced dimensional space, and you can see cluster 6 as a separate grouping. The second panel uses spatial analysis to highlight the physical location of cluster 6 in the tissue sample. The third panel I made presents the top 10 differentially expressed genes in this cluster using a Wilcoxon test. From this panel, I found that Vimentin (VIM) is upregulated, which was confirmed in panels 4 and 5. In panel 4, the graph shows VIM expression in PCA space and panel 5 shows VIM’s spatial distribution in the tissue. Based on these visualizations and some literature review, I could infer a strong association between cluster 6 and mesenchymal properties. 

The expression of VIM strongly suggests that this cluster represents mesenchymal or stromal cells within the breast tissue, specifically cancer associated fibroblasts. Vimentin is a known marker of a process crucial for cancer metastasis known as epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Vimentin is also predominantly expressed in fibroblasts and mesenchymal derived tumors (https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000026025-VIM). Also, studies have shown that tumor progression is heavily driven by CAFs, promoting metastasis (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-018-0641-7). There is a high expression of VIM in cluster 6, and this along with the spatial analysis and physical location provides strong evidence that this cluster is cancer associated stromal cells. 


### 2. Code (paste your code in between the ``` symbols)

```r
library(ggplot2)
library(dplyr)
library(tidyr)
library(stats)
library(Rtsne)
library(gridExtra)

file <- '~/Desktop/genomic-data-visualization-2025/data/pikachu.csv.gz'
data <- read.csv(file)

pos <- data[, 5:6]
rownames(pos) <- data$cell_id

gexp <- data[, 7:ncol(data)]
rownames(gexp) <- data$cell_id

loggexp <- log10(gexp + 1)

scaled_gexp <- scale(loggexp)

pca <- prcomp(scaled_gexp)
df_pca <- data.frame(pca$x)
df_pca$cell_id <- rownames(gexp)

set.seed(42)
kmeans_res <- kmeans(scaled_gexp, centers = 10)
clusters <- as.factor(kmeans_res$cluster)
names(clusters) <- rownames(gexp)

df_pca$cluster <- clusters

interest <- 6
cellsOfInterest <- names(clusters)[clusters == interest]
otherCells <- names(clusters)[clusters != interest]

p_values <- sapply(colnames(gexp), function(gene) {
  wilcox.test(gexp[cellsOfInterest, gene], gexp[otherCells, gene], alternative = "greater")$p.value
})

p_values_df <- data.frame(gene = names(p_values), p_value = p_values) %>%
  arrange(p_value) %>%
  mutate(log_pval = -log10(p_value))

significant_gene <- p_values_df$gene[1]

df_pca$gene_exp <- loggexp[, significant_gene]

p1 <- ggplot(df_pca, aes(x = PC1, y = PC2, col = cluster)) + geom_point() + ggtitle("PCA Clustering of Cells")
p2 <- ggplot(df_pca, aes(x = PC1, y = PC2, col = gene_exp)) + geom_point() + ggtitle(paste(significant_gene, "Expression in PCA Space"))
p3 <- ggplot(pos, aes(x = aligned_x, y = aligned_y, col = clusters)) + geom_point() + ggtitle("Cluster Highlighted in Physical Space")
p4 <- ggplot(pos, aes(x = aligned_x, y = aligned_y, col = loggexp[, significant_gene])) + geom_point() + ggtitle(paste(significant_gene, "Expression in Physical Space"))
p5 <- ggplot(p_values_df[1:10, ], aes(x = log_pval, y = reorder(gene, log_pval))) + geom_col() + ggtitle("Top 10 Differentially Expressed Genes")

grid.arrange(p1, p2, p3, p4, p5, ncol = 2)

```