---
layout: post
title:  "HW1: Gene expression pattern for GNB1 and HES4"
author: Alexandra Mo
jhed: ymo6
categories: [ HW1 ]
image: homework/hw1/hw1_ymo6.png
featured: false
---

### 1. What data types are you visualizing?
I am visualizing HES4 and GNB1's gene expression pattern in the spatial data for eevee. 

### 2. What data encodings (geometric primitives and visual channels) are you using to visualize these data types?
I used points for genmetriic primitives.
I used color, y-position and x-position for visual channels. 

### 3. What about the data are you trying to make salient through this data visualization? 
I am trying to use 4 different colors to demonstrate the spatial gene expression pattern for both genes. It is almost like creating a venn diagram with the gene expressions.

### 4. What Gestalt principles or knowledge about perceptiveness of visual encodings are you using to accomplish this?
I used similarity with color to group cells with similar gene expression pattern. As this is also shown in the legend. Red is for cells that only express HES4, green is for cells that only express GNB1, brown is when both genes are expressed, light grey is when neighr genes are expressed. 

### 5. Code (paste your code in between the ``` symbols)

```r
library(ggplot2)

file <- "~/Downloads/eevee.csv.gz"
data <- read.csv(file)
data[1:5,1:10]


dim(data)
ncol(data)
nrow(data)
rownames(data)
colnames(data)


ggplot(data) +
geom_point(aes(x = aligned_x, y = aligned_y, col = HES4)) + 
scale_color_gradient(low = 'lightgrey', high = 'red')+
theme_bw()


ggplot(data) + geom_point(aes(x = aligned_x, y = aligned_y,col = GNB1)) + 
scale_color_gradient(low = 'lightgrey',high = 'green')+
theme_bw()

data$color <- ifelse(
  data$HES4 != 0 & data$GNB1 == 0, "red", ifelse(
    data$HES4 == 0 & data$GNB1 != 0, "green", ifelse(
      data$HES4 != 0 & data$GNB1 != 0, "brown",
      "lightgrey"
    )
  )
)

ggplot(data) + geom_point(aes(x = aligned_x, y = aligned_y, col = color)) + 
  scale_color_identity(
    guide = "legend",
    labels = c("HES4", "GNB1", "Both Genes", "Neither Gene"),
    breaks = c("red","green","brown","lightgrey")
  )  + 
  labs(title = "Gene expression pattern for GNB1 and HES4") + theme_bw()
```
