---
layout: post
title:  "Homework 1 Submission"
author: Hannah Puhov
jhed: hpuhov1
categories: [ HW1 ]
image: homework/hw1/hw1_hpuhov1.png
featured: false
---

# I am visualizing the gene expression of CD14 and MMP2 and how the expression of these genes relates to cell size.

## What data types are you visualizing?
I am visualizing quantitative data in the form of gene expression profiles of CD14 and MMP2. I am also visualizing cell area as ordinal data. While cell area is technically quantitative, I chose to use bins to visualize cell area rather than a continuous color gradient. This set of bins puts the cell area into categories, but since area is still mathematically relevant, this makes it ordinal data.

## What data encodings (geometric primitives and visual channels) are you using to visualize these data types?
The only geometric primitives I am using are points, which are being used to display the cells that have CD14 and MMP2, as well as their respective expressions. In terms of channels, I am using the position of the points to show relative CD14 and MMP2 expressions, and I use the color of the points to represent the cell area. 

## What about the data are you trying to make salient through this data visualization? 
I found a source [1] that claims that mostly macrophages express both CD14 and MMP2, and I know that macrophages are incredibly large cells. As such, I wanted to make it salient that the more CD14 and MMP2 are expressed together, the larger the cells will be (thus having a darker color). 
1. Cui, Q., Wang, X., Zhang, Y. et al. Macrophage-Derived MMP-9 and MMP-2 are Closely Related to the Rupture of the Fibrous Capsule of Hepatocellular Carcinoma Leading to Tumor Invasion. Biol Proced Online 25, 8 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12575-023-00196-0

## What Gestalt principles and/or knowledge about perceptiveness of visual encodings are you using to accomplish this?
I know that saturation is a better encoding than color, and in particular, viewer's eyes are drawn to higher saturations. As such, I made sure the higher cell area, which I want to draw attention to, was the more saturated color. I am also using the Gestalt principle of proximity, because the points which have very little expression of each gene are all quite close together, so they are perceived as related.


## Code
```{r}
library(ggplot2)

file <- "data/pikachu.csv.gz"
data <- read.csv(file)

#Code used to center the title (line 11) taken from 
#https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/how-to-change-position-of-ggplot-title-in-r/
ggplot(data) + 
  geom_point(aes(x = CD14, y=MMP2, col=cell_area,)) +
  scale_colour_steps(low = 'lightblue', high='darkblue') +
  ggtitle("CD14 and MMP2 Expression Correlation with Cell Area") +
  theme(plot.title = element_text(hjust=0.5)) +
  xlab("CD14 Expression") + ylab("MMP2 Expression")



```
