---
layout: post
title:  "Hw3: PCA and Spatial analysis for One Cluster"
author: Anishka Bhartiya
jhed: abharti1
categories: [ HW3 ]
image: homework/hw3/hw3_abharti1.png
featured: false
---

This panel outlines the PCA and spatial analysis for the Pikachu dataset. The first two graphs are from my previous homework, and they give the big picture. Graph 1 shows all the cells in the PCA space, with 7 clusters. Graph 2 shows all the cells in the spatial space, and displays how the clusters of cells are seen in the tissue sample. Graph 3 hones in on just cluster 3 in the PCA space. Graph 4 shows cluster 3, spatially. Here, we can see that these cells generally form rings or other structures, indicating that they might be of the same cell type. I looked into which genes are averagely expressed the most in this cluster and showed the top 4 as a bar graph. The top gene, ACTG2, codes for acting, a protein that helps muscles contract. This gene is specifically found in enteric tissue, which makes me believe that this tissue sample is from the stomach. I didn't graph the top gene ACTG2 in the PCA space because this data was already one-dimensional so there was no need to do dimensionality reduction on it. However, I did visualize the all the cells spatially with visual channel of saturation to show how much the top gene ACTG2 is expressed in cells. We can see that it is 0 or close to 0 in cells outside of cluster 3. If you look carefully, you can see that some cells near the top and bottom where cluster 3 is are lighter blue, indicating expression. 

Source: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/72

### 5. Code (paste your code in between the ``` symbols)

```r
file <- '/Users/anishkabhartiya/Desktop/genomic-data-visualization-2025/data/pikachu.csv.gz'
data <- read.csv(file)
data[1:5, 1:10]

area <- data[, 3:4]
pos <- data[, 5:6]
rownames(pos) <- data$barcode
head(pos)
gexp <- data[, 7:ncol(data)]
rownames(gexp) <- data$barcode
gexp[1:5,1:5]
dim(gexp)

norm <- gexp / log10(data$cell_area+1) * 3
norm[1:5, 1:5]

pcs <- prcomp(norm)
set.seed(1)


pca_df <- data.frame(
  PC1 = pcs$x[,1],
  PC2 = pcs$x[,2],
  X = data[,5], 
  Y = data[,6] 
)

clusters <- kmeans(pca_df[,1:2], centers = 7)$cluster


pca_df$Cluster <- as.factor(clusters)
pca_df_filtered <- pca_df[pca_df$Cluster == "3", ]
cellsOfInterest <- rownames(pca_df)[pca_df$Cluster == "3"]
otherCells <- rownames(pca_df)[pca_df$Cluster != "3"]

results <- sapply(1:ncol(gexp), function(i) {
  genetest <- gexp[,i]
  names(genetest) <- rownames(gexp)
  
  out <- t.test(genetest[cellsOfInterest], genetest[otherCells], alternative = 'two.sided')
  out$p.value
})

names(results) <- colnames(gexp)
sorted_pvals <- sort(results) 
top_4_genes <- names(sorted_pvals)[1:4]
head(top_4_genes)

sig_genes_expr <- gexp[, top_4_genes]
avg_expr <- apply(sig_genes_expr[cellsOfInterest, ], 2, mean)

bar_data <- data.frame(
  Gene = names(avg_expr),
  Expression = avg_expr
)

bar_data <- bar_data[order(-bar_data$Expression), ]

library(ggplot2)
library(patchwork)

g1 <- ggplot(pca_df, aes(x = PC1, y = PC2, color = Cluster)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.6, size=0.01) +
  labs(title = "All Cells (PCA)",
       x = "PC1",
       y = "PC2") +
  theme_minimal()

g2 <- ggplot(pca_df, aes(x = X, y = Y, color = Cluster)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.6, size=0.01) +
  labs(title = "All Cells (Spatial)",
       x = "X Position",
       y = "Y Position") +
  theme_minimal() + 
  theme(legend.position = "none")

g3 <- ggplot(pca_df_filtered, aes(x = PC1, y = PC2, color = Cluster)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.6, size=0.01, color = '#7CAE00') +
  labs(title = "Cluster 3 (PCA)",
       x = "PC1",
       y = "PC2") +
  theme_minimal() + 
  theme(legend.position = "none")

g4 <- ggplot(pca_df_filtered, aes(x = X, y = Y, color = Cluster)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.6, size=0.01, color = '#7CAE00') +
  labs(title = "Cluster 3 (Spatial)",
       x = "X Position",
       y = "Y Position") +
  theme_minimal() + 
  theme(legend.position = "none")

sig_genes_expr <- gexp[, significant_genes]
avg_expr <- apply(sig_genes_expr[cellsOfInterest, ], 2, mean)

bar_data <- data.frame(
  Gene = names(avg_expr),
  Expression = avg_expr
)

g5 <- ggplot(bar_data[1:4, ], aes(x = reorder(Gene, -Expression), y = Expression)) +
  geom_bar(stat = "identity", fill = "steelblue") +
  labs(title = "Top Genes (Cluster 3)",
       x = "Gene Names",
       y = "Average Expression") +
  theme_minimal()

actg2_expr <- gexp[,"ACTG2"]
pca_df$ACTG2_expr <- actg2_expr

pca_df$Y <- pos[, 2]

g6 <- ggplot(pca_df, aes(x = X, y = Y, color = ACTG2_expr)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.6, size = 0.001) +
  labs(title = "ACTG2 Expression (Spatial)",
       x = "X Position",
       y = "Y Position") +
  theme_minimal()


print(g1 + g2 + g3 + g4 + g5 + g6)
```
